%%%
    title = "CalDAV Extension for scheduling controls"
    abbrev = "CalDAV SchedControl"
    category = "std"
    docName = "draft-gondwana-caldav-scheduling-controls-01"
    updates = [6638]
    ipr= "trust200902"
    area = "Applications"
    workgroup = "calext"
    keyword = ["CalDAV", "Calendar", "Scheduling"]

    date = 2019-03-08T00:00:00Z

    [[author]]
    initials="B."
    surname="Gondwana"
    fullname="Bron Gondwana"
    role="editor"
    organization = "FastMail"
        [author.address]
        email = "brong@fastmailteam.com"
        uri = "https://www.fastmail.com"
        [author.address.postal]
            street = "Level 2, 114 William St"
            city = "Melbourne"
            code = "VIC 3000"
            country = "Australia"
%%%

.# Abstract

This document adds headers to control and restrict the scheduling
behaviour of CalDAV servers when updating calendaring resources.

{mainmatter}

# Introduction

[@!RFC6638] defines automatic scheduling operations for resources stored
on [!@RFC4791] CalDAV servers.

[@!RFC6638] defines the `Schedule-Reply` header in Section 8.1,
however this header is not sufficient for controlling scheduling in all
cases.

Cases where it might be necessary to update the data store on a server without
causing scheduling messages to be sent include backup after a data loss event
on the server, or importing calendar events from another system.

Calendar server operators deal with these other needs by either using
a different method than CalDAV to update their server, or by adding a
custom method to suppress scheduling.  This document defines a standard
method to suppress scheduling, allowing CalDAV to be directly used for
restores and imports.

Complex sites can have users who have multiple aliases, and in the most
complex cases, a user may have multiple identities who are present on a
scheduling event as organizer and/or attendee.  When an event is updated
over CalDAV, the server must calculate or guess which of those addresses
the current user is acting as.  This document defines a header which
allows the client to inform the server precisely which address they are
acting as when adding, modifying or removing a resource.


# Conventions Used In This Document

In examples, "C:" indicates data sent by a client that is connected
to a server. "S:" indicates data sent by the server to the client.

The key words "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**",
"**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**",
"**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [@!RFC2119] when they appear in ALL CAPS.  These words may
also appear in this document in lower case as plain English words,
absent their normative meanings.

# Extending the CalDAV OPTIONS response

A server supporting the features described in this document MUST
include "scheduling-controls" as a field in the DAV response header
from an OPTIONS request.  A value of "scheduling-controls" in the
DAV response header indicates to clients that the server supports all
the requirements specified in this document.

## Example: Using OPTIONS for the Discovery of Scheduling Controls Support

Request:

    OPTIONS /home/brong/calendars/ HTTP/1.1
    Host: cal.example.com

Response:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Allow: OPTIONS, GET, HEAD, POST, PUT, DELETE, TRACE, COPY, MOVE
    Allow: PROPFIND, PROPPATCH, LOCK, UNLOCK, REPORT, ACL
    DAV: 1, 2, 3, access-control, calendar-access,
     scheduling-controls
    Date: Thu, 8 Feb 2019 10:16:37 GMT
    Content-Length: 0

# New headers

This document adds two new headers for use on PUT, PROPPATCH and DELETE:

## Scheduling header

Scheduling: {all|none|internal-only|external-only|X-...}

Default: all

Not providing this header, or providing the value of "all", instructs the
server to follow the behaviour in [@RFC6638] Section 3.2.

Providing the value "none" instructs the server to perform no scheduling
at all, and to just store the event (useful for restoring from backup)

The value "internal-only" instructs the server to update the events in
other calendars within its system where that can be done silently, but not
to send visible notifications to users (where permitted by policy).  This
is useful when importing multiple related calendars into a new system
without flooding external parties with notifications.

The value "external-only" instructs the server to import the data without
updating local calendars, but to send notifications to external attendees
so they are aware of the event.  This is useful when migrating calendar
events to a new system where external parties need to have a way to update
their participation status in the new system.

e.g.

    Scheduling: none

TODO: specify error codes

## Schedule-User-Address header

Schedule-User-Address: URI

Default: not present

If this header is not present, the server will calculate the address from
the authenticated user, or from the CALDAV:schedule-user-address property
on the calendar or principal.

If this header is provided, it overrides the server's internal calculation,
and informs the server to perform any scheduling as the specified user.

TODO: specify error codes

e.g.

    Schedule-User-Address: mailto:foo@example.com

# Implementation considerations

Any server implementing this extension MUST ensure it has a way to validate
Schedule-User-Address settings.

# IANA Considerations

TODO: IANA request for OPTIONS item

TODO: IANA request for named headers

# Security Considerations

The "Scheduling" header only allows reduction of the cases in which the
server will creating scheduling requests.  This is generally good for user
privacy, allowing copies of events to be updated without notifying the
owner or attendees.  This is particularly valuable for cleaning up spam.

The "Schedule-User-Address" header allows the client to override the
server choice of address for the user to act as.  Servers MUST
ensure that the authenticated user has permission to act as the specified
address, as well as applying any local policy limitations.

# Acknowledgments

* Lucia Kristiansen, Google
* CalConnect
* The calext working group

# Version History

Remove before publishing

## v01, 2019-03-08

* correct name in acknowledgements

## v00, 2019-02-08

* Initial draft based on discussion at CalConnect about Google and FastMail private implementations.

{backmatter}
